---
layout: post
title:  "NACGLE IV 2024 - call for papers"
date:   2023-03-07 09:00:00
author: Petra Hermankova
published: true
---


# Call for Papers for the Fourth North American Congress of Greek and Latin Epigraphy (NACGLE IV)

_University of Chicago, January 8-9, 2024_
**Epigraphy and Public Life in the Graeco-Roman World**

The **Fourth North American Congress of Greek and Latin Epigraphy (NACGLE IV)** will be held
at the **University of Chicago** on **January 8-9, 2024**, under the aegis of the American Society of Greek
and Latin Epigraphy (ASGLE), and with support from the University of Chicago.

The congress will take place at the Oriental Institute on the campus of the University of Chicago and
will be held immediately following the Annual Meeting of the Archaeological Institute of America and
the Society for Classical Studies in Chicago (January 4-7, 2024). It will include thematic panels on a
variety of topics, a poster session, a keynote lecture followed by a reception. We are hoping to organize
a visit to the Oriental Institute Museum during the congress. Please note that the conference will be in-
person and on-site in Chicago only. Remote participation will not be possible.

We invite papers that discuss the contribution of epigraphy to our understanding of the political, civic,
economic and social life and institutions of the Greek and Roman world from the archaic period through
late antiquity.

Papers may be devoted to the importance of epigraphy for our understanding of any of the following
topics: civic, political and legal activity; economic production and exchange; social hierarchies and
social mobility; rural communities and agrarian life; military communities. Sessions at the congress will
also be devoted to discussions of new inscriptions and new techniques for reading epigraphic texts and
analyzing inscriptions in bulk. A separate **Call for Posters** will be circulated in spring 2023.
The congress Organizing Committee is pleased to invite individual **abstracts** for the parallel sessions.
They should be a maximum of 500 words (bibliography excluded), suitable for a 20-minute
presentation. Abstracts of between 350 and 500 words should be submitted by email attachment in PDF
or Word document format by **Wednesday 15 April 2023** to NACGLE2024@gmail.com. (Poster
proposals will have a later submission date.) Abstracts will be reviewed by members of the congress
Organizing Committee, and the results of the review process will be made known to potential
participants soon thereafter.

**Panels:** The Organizing Committee also invites proposals for panels. Panels should consist of three or
four papers. The panel organizer should submit all abstracts of a maximum of 500 words each
(bibliography excluded), along with a summary of the panel. This summary should include the names of
the presenters, their affiliation and email addresses, and the titles of the papers, as well as a statement of
the significance of the theme and the theoretical and/or methodological approaches to be applied. When
submitting a summary for the panel, please include the term “panel session NACGLE 2024” in the
subject heading.

To submit a proposal, it is not necessary to be a current member of ASGLE, but we hope that all those
whose papers are accepted for presentation in Chicago will join ASGLE, if they are not already
members.